README.md, before:

# Continuously train a cloud-based machine learning model from an on-premise database

TODO

![Architecture](doc/source/images/architecture.png)

## Flow

1. Source data is retained in on-premise Db2 database.
1. Data is accessible to Watson Studio via a Secure Gateway.
1. Secure gateway is utilized to train a cloud-based machine learning model.
1. Training feedback is stored in Db2 Warehouse for continuous learning.

## Included components

* [IBM Db2 Warehouse on
  Cloud](https://www.ibm.com/cloud/db2-warehouse-on-cloud): An elastic,
  fully-managed cloud data warehouse service that is powered by IBM BLU
  Acceleration technology for increased performance and optimization of
  analytics at a massive scale.
* [IBM Watson Studio](https://www.ibm.com/cloud/watson-studio): Build and train
  AI models, and prepare and analyze data, in a single, integrated environment.

## Technologies

* [Docker](https://www.docker.com/): Docker containers wrap up software and its
  dependencies into a standardized unit for software development that includes
  everything it needs to run: code, runtime, system tools and libraries.

## Steps

1. [Create a Watson Studio instance](#create-a-watson-studio-instance)
1. [Create a Db2 Warehouse on IBM Cloud](#create-a-db2-warehouse-on-ibm-cloud)
1. [Load sample data into an on-premise Db2 database](#load-sample-data-into-an-on-premise-db2-database)
1. [Configure a secure gateway to IBM Cloud](#configure-a-secure-gateway-to-ibm-cloud)
1. [Connect to on-premise Db2 database from Watson Studio](#connect-to-on-premise-db2-database-from-watson-studio)
1. [Create a machine learning model](#create-a-machine-learning-model)
1. [Enable continuous learning](#enable-continuous-learning)

### Create a Watson Studio instance

In order to build and train your machine learning model, you'll need to [sign
up for Watson Studio](https://www.ibm.com/cloud/watson-studio), which you can
do for free.

### Create a Db2 Warehouse on IBM Cloud

Next, you'll need to [create a Db2 Warehouse
instance](https://console.bluemix.net/catalog/services/db2-warehouse). The size
of the dataset used in this pattern will not incur billing.

### Load sample data into an on-premise Db2 database

The fastest way to get started with Db2 on-premise is to use the no-charge
community edition, running in a Docker container. However, if you already have
an on-premise Db2 instance, feel free to substitute that instead.

We'll be populating the database with a sample dataset of building code
violations, provided by the city of Chicago.

If you don't already have Docker installed, follow the official [installation
guide](https://docs.docker.com/installation/).

Start by using [`docker run`](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/run/) to
launch Db2 community edition in a container running in the background.

> Including the `--env LICENSE="accept"` argument indicates your acceptance of
  the [license
  agreement](http://www-03.ibm.com/software/sla/sladb.nsf/displaylis/5DF1EE126832D3F185257DAB0064BEFA?OpenDocument)
  to use the software contained in the Docker image.

This command sets a password for the `db2inst1` user to `db2inst1-pwd` for the
default Db2 instance and exposes Db2 on port `50000` of the host:

```bash
docker run \
  --name db2 \
  --env LICENSE="accept" \
  --env DB2INST1_PASSWORD="db2inst1-pwd" \
  --publish 50000:50000 \
  --detach \
  ibmcom/db2express-c \
  db2start
```

Next, run a `db2` command inside the running container using [`docker
exec`](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/commandline/exec/) as the
`db2inst1` user to [create a
database](https://www.ibm.com/support/knowledgecenter/en/SSEPGG_10.5.0/com.ibm.db2.luw.admin.dbobj.doc/doc/t0004916.html)
named `watson`:

```bash
docker exec db2 su - db2inst1 -c "db2 CREATE DATABASE watson"
```

Create a database table in the `watson` database for building code violations
named `violations`:

```bash
docker exec db2 su - db2inst1 -c "db2 CONNECT TO watson; db2 'CREATE TABLE violations(ID INTEGER, VIOLATION_CODE VARCHAR(20), INSPECTOR_ID VARCHAR(15), INSPECTION_STATUS VARCHAR(10), INSPECTION_CATEGORY VARCHAR(10), DEPARTMENT_BUREAU VARCHAR(30), ADDRESS VARCHAR(250), LATITUDE DOUBLE, LONGITUDE DOUBLE)'"
```

Then, use [`docker
cp`](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/commandline/cp/) to push the
[`violations.csv`](violations.csv) file (from this repository) into the `db2`
container.

```bash
docker cp violations.csv db2:/tmp/
```

Load the sample data into the `watson` database in Db2:

```bash
docker exec db2 su - db2inst1 -c "db2 CONNECT TO watson; db2 'LOAD FROM /tmp/violations.csv OF DEL REPLACE INTO violations'"
```

At this point, you have a Db2 database instance loaded with sample data.

### Configure a secure gateway to IBM Cloud

To enable Watson studio to access the on-premise database, you'll need to
configure a secure gateway, which allows limited network ingress to your
on-premise network as governed by an access control list (ACL).

Before you begin, you need to take note of your workstation's LAN IP. You can
find that address using:

```bash
$ hostname -I
192.168.1.100
```

> Your workstation may have more than one IP, but any of them will likely work
  for the purposes of this code pattern.

For the purposes of this code pattern, we'll assume that your LAN IP is
`192.168.1.100`.

Create a [Secure
Gateway](https://console.bluemix.net/catalog/services/secure-gateway) from the
IBM Cloud Catalog.

Once the gateway is created, select **Connect Client** and choose **Docker** as
the connection method.

The console will provide you with a complete Docker command to pull and run the
secure gateway client, which looks something like `docker run -it
ibmcom/secure-gateway-client $GATEWAY_ID -t $SECURITY_TOKEN` (with a real
gateway ID and security token unique to your Secure Gateway). Use the copy icon
to copy the command, and run it locally.

By default, the gateway starts in a default-deny state, meaning that all
incoming connections will be blocked to all network resources. To allow Watson
Studio to access your Db2 instance, we need to specifically allow access to the
port published by Docker on your workstation's LAN IP address (e.g.
`192.168.1.100`):

    acl allow 192.168.1.100:50000

Incoming connections from Watson Studio which pass through the secure gateway
will now be able to access Db2.

> When you're finished with this code pattern, you can close the secure gateway
  by typing `quit` at the prompt and pressing <kbd>Enter</kbd>.

See the
[documentation](https://console.bluemix.net/docs/services/SecureGateway/index.html#getting-started-with-sg)
for additional configuration options.

### Connect to on-premise Db2 database from Watson Studio

Create a **New Project**.

Select **Complete**, when prompted.

Enter a project name, and click **Create**.

Near the top right of the screen, select the **Add to project** dropdown, choose
**Connection**, and select **Db2** from the available options.

Configure the connection as follows:

* **Name**: `On-Premise`.
* **Database**: `watson`.
* **Hostname or IP Address**: your workstation's LAN IP (e.g. `192.168.1.100`)
* **Port**: `50000`.
* **Secure Gateway**: &#9745; (and ensure your new Secure Gateway is selected in
  the corresponding dropdown menu)
* **Username**: `db2inst1`.
* **Password**: `db2inst1-pwd`.

Add to Project-> Connected asset-> select the table from the DB

> Watson Machine Learning models do not support Data assets from Db2 on-prem,
> so we now have to convert the Data asset into a csv

#### Refine the asset

Data Assets-> Refine-> Add operation-> run

It is now saved as a csv

### Create a machine learning model

#### Create a WML model

Associate a ML service-

Associate an IBM analytics service- (Spark)

Select the Type of classification, data asset, Input and output features,
   estimators and the final model.

#### Deploy the model

Use these endpoints in your notebook on new data.

### Enable continuous learning

#### Configure Performance Monitoring:

> Watson Studio only supports Db2 Watson on Cloud tables as Feedback tables

#### On Db2 Warehouse on Cloud

Create a Row-organized table (Feedback table)

Load data into your table

    CREATE TRIGGER feedback_trigger NO CASCADE BEFORE INSERT ON violations_feedback REFERENCING NEW AS n FOR EACH ROW SET n."_training"=CURRENT_TIMESTAMP

    CREATE TABLE violations_feedback(ID INTEGER,VIOLATION_CODE VARCHAR(20),INSPECTOR_ID VARCHAR(15),INSPECTION_STATUS VARCHAR(10),INSPECTION_CATEGORY VARCHAR(10),DEPARTMENT_BUREAU VARCHAR(30),ADDRESS VARCHAR(250),LATITUDE DOUBLE,LONGITUDE DOUBLE,"_TRAINING" TIMESTAMP NOT NULL) ORGANIZE BY ROW

    Alter table violations_feedback alter column "_TRAINING" set NOT NULL

#### Performance Monitoring

Select the feedback metric, the feedback table, Trigger event (Eg: after 50
rows are added to the table)

When the Trigger event occurs, It will pull in new data from the Feedback table
and re-train your model. If the new model performs better, this will be
deployed.

> After Watson Studio uses the Feedback table, it writes a column `_TRAINING`
> into the Feedback table, with Timestamp.

This column has a not null constraint. To load new data into the Feedback table-

1. Add a column called `_TRAINING` in your dataset

1. Alter the table and remove the NOT NULL constraint from the column

# License

[Apache 2.0](LICENSE)

Commit message:

Explain why loopback won't work

README.md, after:

# Continuously train a cloud-based machine learning model from an on-premise database

TODO

![Architecture](doc/source/images/architecture.png)

## Flow

1. Source data is retained in on-premise Db2 database.
1. Data is accessible to Watson Studio via a Secure Gateway.
1. Secure gateway is utilized to train a cloud-based machine learning model.
1. Training feedback is stored in Db2 Warehouse for continuous learning.

## Included components

* [IBM Db2 Warehouse on
  Cloud](https://www.ibm.com/cloud/db2-warehouse-on-cloud): An elastic,
  fully-managed cloud data warehouse service that is powered by IBM BLU
  Acceleration technology for increased performance and optimization of
  analytics at a massive scale.
* [IBM Watson Studio](https://www.ibm.com/cloud/watson-studio): Build and train
  AI models, and prepare and analyze data, in a single, integrated environment.

## Technologies

* [Docker](https://www.docker.com/): Docker containers wrap up software and its
  dependencies into a standardized unit for software development that includes
  everything it needs to run: code, runtime, system tools and libraries.

## Steps

1. [Create a Watson Studio instance](#create-a-watson-studio-instance)
1. [Create a Db2 Warehouse on IBM Cloud](#create-a-db2-warehouse-on-ibm-cloud)
1. [Load sample data into an on-premise Db2 database](#load-sample-data-into-an-on-premise-db2-database)
1. [Configure a secure gateway to IBM Cloud](#configure-a-secure-gateway-to-ibm-cloud)
1. [Connect to on-premise Db2 database from Watson Studio](#connect-to-on-premise-db2-database-from-watson-studio)
1. [Create a machine learning model](#create-a-machine-learning-model)
1. [Enable continuous learning](#enable-continuous-learning)

### Create a Watson Studio instance

In order to build and train your machine learning model, you'll need to [sign
up for Watson Studio](https://www.ibm.com/cloud/watson-studio), which you can
do for free.

### Create a Db2 Warehouse on IBM Cloud

Next, you'll need to [create a Db2 Warehouse
instance](https://console.bluemix.net/catalog/services/db2-warehouse). The size
of the dataset used in this pattern will not incur billing.

### Load sample data into an on-premise Db2 database

The fastest way to get started with Db2 on-premise is to use the no-charge
community edition, running in a Docker container. However, if you already have
an on-premise Db2 instance, feel free to substitute that instead.

We'll be populating the database with a sample dataset of building code
violations, provided by the city of Chicago.

If you don't already have Docker installed, follow the official [installation
guide](https://docs.docker.com/installation/).

Start by using [`docker run`](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/run/) to
launch Db2 community edition in a container running in the background.

> Including the `--env LICENSE="accept"` argument indicates your acceptance of
  the [license
  agreement](http://www-03.ibm.com/software/sla/sladb.nsf/displaylis/5DF1EE126832D3F185257DAB0064BEFA?OpenDocument)
  to use the software contained in the Docker image.

This command sets a password for the `db2inst1` user to `db2inst1-pwd` for the
default Db2 instance and exposes Db2 on port `50000` of the host:

```bash
docker run \
  --name db2 \
  --env LICENSE="accept" \
  --env DB2INST1_PASSWORD="db2inst1-pwd" \
  --publish 50000:50000 \
  --detach \
  ibmcom/db2express-c \
  db2start
```

Next, run a `db2` command inside the running container using [`docker
exec`](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/commandline/exec/) as the
`db2inst1` user to [create a
database](https://www.ibm.com/support/knowledgecenter/en/SSEPGG_10.5.0/com.ibm.db2.luw.admin.dbobj.doc/doc/t0004916.html)
named `watson`:

```bash
docker exec db2 su - db2inst1 -c "db2 CREATE DATABASE watson"
```

Create a database table in the `watson` database for building code violations
named `violations`:

```bash
docker exec db2 su - db2inst1 -c "db2 CONNECT TO watson; db2 'CREATE TABLE violations(ID INTEGER, VIOLATION_CODE VARCHAR(20), INSPECTOR_ID VARCHAR(15), INSPECTION_STATUS VARCHAR(10), INSPECTION_CATEGORY VARCHAR(10), DEPARTMENT_BUREAU VARCHAR(30), ADDRESS VARCHAR(250), LATITUDE DOUBLE, LONGITUDE DOUBLE)'"
```

Then, use [`docker
cp`](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/commandline/cp/) to push the
[`violations.csv`](violations.csv) file (from this repository) into the `db2`
container.

```bash
docker cp violations.csv db2:/tmp/
```

Load the sample data into the `watson` database in Db2:

```bash
docker exec db2 su - db2inst1 -c "db2 CONNECT TO watson; db2 'LOAD FROM /tmp/violations.csv OF DEL REPLACE INTO violations'"
```

At this point, you have a Db2 database instance loaded with sample data.

### Configure a secure gateway to IBM Cloud

To enable Watson studio to access the on-premise database, you'll need to
configure a secure gateway, which allows limited network ingress to your
on-premise network as governed by an access control list (ACL).

Before you begin, you need to take note of your workstation's LAN IP. You can
find that address using:

```bash
$ hostname -I
192.168.1.100
```

> Your workstation may have more than one IP, but any of them will likely work
  for the purposes of this code pattern, because Docker will bind to all
  network interfaces.

> It's worth mentioning that `loopback` addresses (e.g. `127.0.0.1`) will not
  work here, because IBM Cloud services consuming the secure gateway cannot
  distinguish between their own `loopback` interfaces and one on the other end
  of a secure gateway.

For the purposes of this code pattern, we'll assume that your LAN IP is
`192.168.1.100`.

Create a [Secure
Gateway](https://console.bluemix.net/catalog/services/secure-gateway) from the
IBM Cloud Catalog.

Once the gateway is created, select **Connect Client** and choose **Docker** as
the connection method.

The console will provide you with a complete Docker command to pull and run the
secure gateway client, which looks something like `docker run -it
ibmcom/secure-gateway-client $GATEWAY_ID -t $SECURITY_TOKEN` (with a real
gateway ID and security token unique to your Secure Gateway). Use the copy icon
to copy the command, and run it locally.

By default, the gateway starts in a default-deny state, meaning that all
incoming connections will be blocked to all network resources. To allow Watson
Studio to access your Db2 instance, we need to specifically allow access to the
port published by Docker on your workstation's LAN IP address (e.g.
`192.168.1.100`):

    acl allow 192.168.1.100:50000

Incoming connections from Watson Studio which pass through the secure gateway
will now be able to access Db2.

> When you're finished with this code pattern, you can close the secure gateway
  by typing `quit` at the prompt and pressing <kbd>Enter</kbd>.

See the
[documentation](https://console.bluemix.net/docs/services/SecureGateway/index.html#getting-started-with-sg)
for additional configuration options.

### Connect to on-premise Db2 database from Watson Studio

Create a **New Project**.

Select **Complete**, when prompted.

Enter a project name, and click **Create**.

Near the top right of the screen, select the **Add to project** dropdown, choose
**Connection**, and select **Db2** from the available options.

Configure the connection as follows:

* **Name**: `On-Premise`.
* **Database**: `watson`.
* **Hostname or IP Address**: your workstation's LAN IP (e.g. `192.168.1.100`)
* **Port**: `50000`.
* **Secure Gateway**: &#9745; (and ensure your new Secure Gateway is selected in
  the corresponding dropdown menu)
* **Username**: `db2inst1`.
* **Password**: `db2inst1-pwd`.

Add to Project-> Connected asset-> select the table from the DB

> Watson Machine Learning models do not support Data assets from Db2 on-prem,
> so we now have to convert the Data asset into a csv

#### Refine the asset

Data Assets-> Refine-> Add operation-> run

It is now saved as a csv

### Create a machine learning model

#### Create a WML model

Associate a ML service-

Associate an IBM analytics service- (Spark)

Select the Type of classification, data asset, Input and output features,
   estimators and the final model.

#### Deploy the model

Use these endpoints in your notebook on new data.

### Enable continuous learning

#### Configure Performance Monitoring:

> Watson Studio only supports Db2 Watson on Cloud tables as Feedback tables

#### On Db2 Warehouse on Cloud

Create a Row-organized table (Feedback table)

Load data into your table

    CREATE TRIGGER feedback_trigger NO CASCADE BEFORE INSERT ON violations_feedback REFERENCING NEW AS n FOR EACH ROW SET n."_training"=CURRENT_TIMESTAMP

    CREATE TABLE violations_feedback(ID INTEGER,VIOLATION_CODE VARCHAR(20),INSPECTOR_ID VARCHAR(15),INSPECTION_STATUS VARCHAR(10),INSPECTION_CATEGORY VARCHAR(10),DEPARTMENT_BUREAU VARCHAR(30),ADDRESS VARCHAR(250),LATITUDE DOUBLE,LONGITUDE DOUBLE,"_TRAINING" TIMESTAMP NOT NULL) ORGANIZE BY ROW

    Alter table violations_feedback alter column "_TRAINING" set NOT NULL

#### Performance Monitoring

Select the feedback metric, the feedback table, Trigger event (Eg: after 50
rows are added to the table)

When the Trigger event occurs, It will pull in new data from the Feedback table
and re-train your model. If the new model performs better, this will be
deployed.

> After Watson Studio uses the Feedback table, it writes a column `_TRAINING`
> into the Feedback table, with Timestamp.

This column has a not null constraint. To load new data into the Feedback table-

1. Add a column called `_TRAINING` in your dataset

1. Alter the table and remove the NOT NULL constraint from the column

# License

[Apache 2.0](LICENSE)
